 一般包括英语口语和英语听力两大部分。考生对此不可小视，复试前一定要注重语感的练习。
    
    1、英语口语
    
     对口语的考查，各个学校各不相同。有的学校制定了非常详细的标准和流程，甚至规定了每个老师发问的方式和时间；有的只是面试老师的自由发挥，成绩也基本上由面试老师主观判定。不管面试是否严格控制，考生对下面几个问题一定要认真准备：一是自我介绍，如自己来自什么地方，毕业学校，所学专业，业余喜好，家庭基本情况等信息；二是做好用英语讲解自己专业的准备。口语测试时老师有可能要求你就本专业展开话题，考查你用英语讲解陌生概念的能力。因此考生对此要有所准备，先用笔头组织这些问题的要点，然后再以这些词组织语言。在阅读专业文献时，也要多积累一些专业方面的英语词汇。当然提问的问题不可能难度太高。 
    
    1）评价标准：
    
    (1)语言准确性（语法和用词的准确性、语法结构的复杂性、词汇的丰富程度、发音的准确性）
    
    (2)话语的长短和连贯性（内容的连贯性、寻找合适词语而造成的停顿频率及长短、表达思想的语言长短等）
    
    (3)语言的灵活性和适合性（语言表达是否灵活、自然，话语是否得体，语言能否与语境、动能和目的相适应）
    
    2）口语测试一般包含如下两部分：
    
    第一部分：考查学生理解并回答有关日常生活、家庭、工作、学习等问题的能力（3--5分钟）。
    
    第二部分：考查学生连续表达的能力。考生从所给的问题中选择一个话题，就此话题表达自己的看法（7--10分钟）。
    
    3）评价成绩一般为：
    
    (1)优秀--能用外语就指定的话题进行口头交流，基本没有困难
    
    (2)良好--能用外语就指定的题材进行口头交流，虽有些困难，但不影响交流
    
    (3)及格--能用外语就指定的话题进行简单的口头交流
    
    (4)不及格--不具有口头表达能力
    
    4）考研英语复试口语常见问题30例
    
    1. Where do you come from?
    
    2. What kind of landscape surrounds your hometown? 
    
    3. What do you do during the Spring Festival?
    
    4. Tell me something about the customs of your hometown. 
    
    5. Could you tell me something about your family? 
    
    6. What social responsibilities should a post-graduate take?
    
    7. Which kind of professor do you like best?
    
    8. What does friendship mean to you and what kind of people do you make friend with?
    
    9. What is your major? How do you like your major? 
    
    10. When and where did you graduate? What qualifications have you obtained?
    
    11. What impressed you most when you were at university?
    
    12. What is the best university in your opinion?
    
    13. Do you think the subjects you are studying today are relevant to present-day society? Why ？
    
    14. What do you do for a living?
    
    15. What are your job prospects? 
    
    16. If you had the opportunity to change your subject, what would you do with it? 
    
    17. What are your spare time interests?
    
    18. Where have you been traveling to? Which place interested you most? 
    
    19. What kind of differences in the system of higher education between China and other countries? 
    
    20. Do you think you will be able to cope with English-demands of your intended study program? 
    
    21. What difficulties do you think you'll encounter in your studies? 
    
    22. Why did you choose our university? 
    
    23. If there were an opportunity of studying abroad, what would you do?
    
    24. Should you study more theory or do more practice? Give your reasons, please.
    
    25. What do you intend to do after you finish studying?
    
    26. How serious is unemployment among young people and what will you do if you cannot find a job after graduation? 
    
    27. In your opinion, what are the most serious problems associated with modern life?
    
    28. What do you think have been the most important changes in your study field over the past 5 years?   
    
    29. How do you afford your tuition?
    
    30. Does your family support your decision on studying? What help do they offer?
    
    5）部分常考话题参考范文
    
    1. 自我介绍(self-introduction)
    
    Good morning, my dear professors. It's my pleasure to be given a chance for your interview. My name is XXX，I am XXX years old. I come from XXX, a very beautiful city. My undergraduate period will be accomplished in XXX university in July, 2011, and now, I am striving for obtaining a key to your prestigious universuty.
    
    In the past year I have been prepareing for the postgraduate examination for it has been my dream to be a postgraduate. I am open-minded ,quick in thought and very fond of this major.In my spare time,I have broad interests like many other youngsters and I will try my best to finish it no matter how difficult it is.Frequently I exchange with other people by making comments in the forum on line.In addition, I am a person with great perseverance. During my college years, I found web sign very interesting, so I learned it very hard. Therefore, I have a comparative good command of network application and I am skillful in searching for information on Internet. Well, in my spare time, I like basketball, tennis and Chinese chess. Also English is my favorite. I often go to English corner to practice my oral English, and write compositions to improve my written ability.
    I always believe that one will easily lag behind unless he keeps on learning .Of course, if I am given a chance to study XXX in this famous University, I will concentrate on my study and make great efforts to master a good command of advance XXX.
    
    Ok, that is all, thank you for your attention. 
    
    2.考研原因 (reasons for my choice)
    
    There are several reasons accounting for my endeavor.
    
    Above all, I have been deeply impressed by the academic atmosphere when I came here last summer. In my opinion, as one of the most famous XXX in our country, it provides people with enough room to get further achievement. This is the first reason.
    
    The second one is I am long for doing research in XXX throughout my life. It's a pleasure to be with my favorite XXX for lifetime. I suppose this is the most important factor in my decision.
    
    Thirdly, I learnt a lot from my XXX job during the past two years. However, I think further study is still urgent for me to realize self-value. Life is precious. It is necessary to seize any chance for self-development, especially in this competitive modern world.
    
    In a word, I am looking forward to making a solid foundation for future profession after two years study here.
    
    3.研究生期间你的计划 (plans in the postgraduate study)
    
    First, I hope I can form systematic view of XXX. As for XXX, my express wish is to get a complete comprehension of the formation and development as well as XXX. If possible, I will go on with my study for doctorate degree.
    
    In a word, I am looking forward to making a solid foundation for future profession after two years study here.
    
    4 .介绍你的家乡(about hometown)
    
    I am from XXX, a famous city with a long history over 2,200 years. It is called XXX because there were lots of XXX even 900 years ago. The city lies in the eastern part of the province. It is the center of politics, economy and culture. Many celebrities were born here, for instance, XXX，XXX and XXX 。 . You know, there is a saying that "The greatness of a man lends a glory to a place"。 I think the city really deserves it. In addition, it is famous for the hot springs. They are known for high-quality. Visitors at home and abroad feel it comfortable bathing here.There is my beloved hometown.
    
    5.你的家庭(about family)
    
    There are four members in my family: my parents, my XXX and me. My father is a technician in XXX. He often goes out on business and therefore, most of the housework is done by my industrious mom. Climbing at weekends is our common interest. The fresh air and natural beauty can help us get rid of tiredness. They can strengthen our relation, too.During my prepareing for coming here, my parents'love and support have always been my power and I hope in the future I wil be able to repay them.
    
    6.你的大学(about university)
    
    XXX University is the oldest one in the province. It was founded in XXX and covers an area of over XXX. The building area is XXX square meters. It develops into a comprehensive university with efforts of generations, especially after the reform and opening up. It takes the lead among the XXX universities with excellent teaching and scientific research ability. The library has the storage of XXX books and various research institutes are set up including XXX research centers. There are teaching research experimental bases. For example, the computer center, analyzing-test center, modern education technical center and so on.
    
    Remember that practice makes perfect!
    
    2、英语听力
    
    英语听力做到精听与泛听相结合，听力测试时，一类是听提前录制好的话题，类似大学的四六级外语考试。还有一类可能是随机抽取话题，让两位考生对话，根据各自表现打分。在备考时，考生可以加强历年四、六级听力真题的温习，还可以泛听一些英语材料，做到精听与泛听相结合。例如旅途中、睡觉前都可以听听比较成熟的音像资料，提高自己的语感。 